Due to the high data rates involved in audio, video, and signal
processing applications, it is imperative to compress the data to
decrease the amount of storage used.  Unfortunately, this implies that
any program operating on the data needs to be wrapped by a
decompression and re-compression stage.  Re-compression can incur
significant computational overhead, while decompression swamps the
application with the original volume of data.

In this paper, we present a program transformation that greatly
accelerates the processing of compressible data.  Given a program that
operates on uncompressed data, we output an equivalent program that
operates directly on the compressed format.  Our transformation
applies to stream programs, a restricted but useful class of
applications with regular communication and computation patterns.  Our
formulation is based on LZ77, a lossless compression algorithm
utilized by ZIP, and immediately applies to simpler formats such as
Apple Animation, Microsoft RLE, and Targa.

We implemented a simple subset of our techniques in the StreamIt
compiler, which emits executable plugins for two popular video editing
tools: MEncoder and Blender.  For common operations such as color
adjustment and video compositing, computing directly on compressed
data offers a speedup roughly proportional to the overall compression
ratio.  For our benchmark suite of 12 videos in Apple Animation
format, speedups range from 1.0x to 235x, with a median of 16x.
