* Reviewer 1 repeatedly states that our technique is limited to
run-length encoding.  This is inaccurate; we support LZ77 compression,
which in many ways is the gold standard of lossless compression
techniques.  Unlike run-length encoding, LZ77 is asymptotically
optimal [1] and is pervasively used in ZIP and other formats.  As no
technique should be expected to handle all compression formats, we
feel that our title "Computing Directly on Compressed Data" is fair.

- We agree with Reviewer 1 that the first few paragraphs can imply
undue generality with respect to lossy compression formats.  We did
not intend this implication and we will fix it in the final version.
Overall, we believe the technical claims in the paper are very
precise; we even devoted an entire page (Section 4) to the practical
limitations of the technique.

- Reviewers 2 and 3 ask about the prevalence of stateful filters.  An
ASPLOS'06 paper by Gordon et al. shows that state is quite rare in
stream programs (9 of 12 benchmarks were completely stateless).

- Reviewer 3 has a question about Figure 7.  Actor A does appear as
part of the exec-uncompressed rule, though the rule is spelled out in
Figure 6.  We will clarify this in the final version.

- Reviewer 4 asks about the baseline algorithm.  We confirm that the
baseline operates frame-by-frame rather than writing temporary files
to disk.

- Reviewer 5 asks whether the pixel transformations are free from
alignment cost.  Yes, there is no alignment cost because the actor
inputs only a single value from the LZ77 stream.  (However, as the
values are in RGBA format, they are 4 bytes rather than 1 byte.)

[1] Wyner and Ziv, "The Sliding-Window Lempel-Ziv Algorithm is
Asymptotically Optimal", Proceedings of the IEEE, 1994.
