\section{Related Work}
\label{sec:related}

Several other researchers have pursued the idea of operating directly
on compressed data formats.  The novelty of our work is two-fold:
first, in its ability to map an arbitrary stream program, rather than
a single predefined operation, into the compressed domain; and second,
in its focus on lossless compression formats.

Most of the previous work on mapping algorithms into the compressed
domain has focused on formats such as JPEG that utilize a Discrete
Cosine Transform (DCT) to achieve spatial
compression~\cite{smith98,dorai00,dugad01,feng03,mukherjee02,nang00,shen96,shen96b,shen98,smith96b,vasudev98}.
This task requires a different analysis, with particular attention
given to details such as the blocked decomposition of the image,
quantization of DCT coefficients, zig-zag ordering, and so-on.
Because there is also a run-length encoding stage in JPEG, our current
technique might find some application there; however, it appears that
techniques designed for JPEG have limited application to formats such
as LZ77.  Also, we are unaware of any previous methodology for
translating a generic program to operate on compressed data; previous
efforts have mapped each algorithm in a manual and ad-hoc way.

There has been some interest in performing compressed processing on
lossless encodings of black-and-white images.  Shoji presents the pxy
format for performing transpose and other affine
operations~\cite{shoji95}; the memory behavior of the technique was
later improved by Misra et al.~\cite{misra99}.  As described in
Section~\ref{sec:formats}, the pxy format lists the $(x,y)$ coordinate
pairs at which a black-and-white image changes color during a
horizontal scan.  As illustrated in Figure~\ref{fig:sj-example}, our
technique can also preserve a certain amount of compression during a
transpose, though we may achieve lesser compression than the pxy
format due to our one-dimensional view of the data.

Researchers have also considered the problem of pattern matching on
compressed text.  A randomized algorithm has been developed for
LZ77~\cite{farach98matching} while deterministic strategies exist for
LZ78 and LZW~\cite{navarro03regular,navarro05lzgrep}.  These solutions
are specialized to searching text; they do not apply to our
transformations, and our technique does not apply to theirs.

In the realm of programming languages, Swartz and Smith present RIVL,
a Resolution Independent Video Language~\cite{swartz95}.  The language
is used to describe a sequence of image transformations; this allows
the compiler to analyze the sequence and, via lazy evaluation, to
eliminate any operations that do not effect the final output.  Such a
technique is complementary to ours and could also be implemented using
StreamIt as the source language.

