

We use RAW to prove the validity of our research, as a demonstration.
Our research is important for any multicore architecture but
especially for architectures with a fast on-chip communication network
(CELL, etc.).  For these architectures, our approach leverages the
on-chip network necessray for scaling while benefiting from flexible
load-balancing and scheduling.  This is unlike previous approaches
that cannot make both claims (for example Cilk's shared memory model).

Reviewer 4 calls the work incremental.  Our research is very different
from previous compilations systems accepting StreamIt and/or targeting
multicores.  We used the space-multiplexing and time-multiplexing
analogy to help the reader understand our research.  

Dynamic filter input and output rates can be naturally and efficiently
supported by SpaceTime multiplexing.  Limit dynamic i/o rates to
the slice boundaries, allowing for load balancing within a slice and
off-chip buffering between dynamic rate slices.  Mention it is an area
of future work?

In response to Reviewer 2, the utilization metric includes stalls due
to cache accesses and pipeline hazards for each tile.  Each RAW tile
is a single-issue, inorder processor.  Stalls are frequent.

Utilization should not be compared between space multiplexing and
SpaceTime multiplexing because space multiplexing adds compute
instructions necessary to implement filter fusion (the data buffering
and redistribution of filters mapped to a single node). In
SpaceTime this is achieved using the communication networks.  A
throughput comparison makes more sense.

Reviewer 4, while we are inspired by instruction-level software
pipelining, we feel that our problem (software-pipelining of
course-grained graphs) and our algorithms are novel and do not warrant
a more detailed comparison to previous work. Due to the breadth of
this work, there exists much related work and we love related work
suggestions.

We agree with Reviewer 2, the organization and quality of the writing
needs to be improved, but Reviewer 2 is critical only of the
presentation.  

Feedbackloop support  

Outliers? 