\section{The StreamIt Language}
\label{sec:language}

In this section we provide a very brief overview of the StreamIt
language; please see \cite{streamittech} for a more detailed
description.  The current version of StreamIt is legal Java syntax to
simplify our presentation and implementation, and it is designed to
support only streams with static input and output rates.  Designing a
cleaner syntax and considering dynamically varying rates will be the
subject of future work.

\subsection{Filters}

The basic unit of computation in StreamIt is the {\tt Filter}.  An
example of a Filter is the {\tt Adder}, a component of our
software radio (see Figure \ref{fig:radiocode}).  Each {\tt Filter}
contains an {\tt init} function that is called at initialization time;
in this case, the {\tt Adder} records {\tt N}, the number of
items it should filter at once.  A user should instantiate a filter by
using its constructor, and the {\tt init} function will be called
implicitly with the same arguments that were passed to the
constructor{\footnote{This design might seem unnatural, but it is
necessary to allow inlining (Section \ref{sec:connecting}) within a
Java-based syntax.}}.

The {\tt work} function describes the most fine grained execution step
of the filter in the steady state.  Within the {\tt work} function,
the filter can communicate with its neighbors using the {\tt input}
and {\tt output} channels, which are typed FIFO queues declared within
the {\tt init} function.  These high-volume channels support the
intuitive operations of {\tt push(value)}, {\tt pop()}, and {\tt
peek(index)}, where {\tt peek} returns the value at position {\tt
index} without dequeuing the item.


\begin{figure}
\scriptsize
\begin{verbatim}
class Adder extends Filter {
  int N;

  void init (int N) {
    this.N = N;
    input = new Channel(Float.TYPE, N);
    output = new Channel(Float.TYPE, 1);
  }
  
  void work() {
    float sum = 0;
    for (int i=0; i<N; i++) {
      sum += input.popFloat();
    }
    output.pushFloat(sum);
  }
}

public class Equalizer extends Pipeline {
  void init(float samplingRate, int N) {
    add(new SplitJoin() {
      void init() {
        int bottom = 2500;
        int top = 5000;
        setSplitter(DUPLICATE());
        for (int i=0; i<N; i++, bottom*=2, top*=2) {
          add(new BandPassFilter(samplingRate, bottom, top));
        }
        setJoiner(ROUND_ROBIN());
    }});
    add(new Adder(N));
  }
}
  
class FMRadio extends Pipeline {
  void init() {
    add(new DataSource());
    add(new LowPassFilter(samplingRate, cutoffFrequency, numTaps));
    add(new FMDemodulator(samplingRate, maxAmplitude, bandwidth));
    add(new Equalizer(samplingRate, 4));
    add(new Speaker());
  }
}
\end{verbatim}
\vspace{-12pt}
\caption{Parts of an FM Radio in StreamIt.
\protect\label{fig:radiocode}}
\vspace{-12pt}
\end{figure}

\subsubsection{Rationale}
\label{sec:oo-rat}

StreamIt's representation of a filter is an improvement over
general-purpose languages.  In a procedural language, the analog of a
filter is a block of statements in a complicated loop nest.  There is
no clear abstraction barrier between one filter and another, and
high-volume stream processing is muddled with global variables and
control flow. The loop nest must be re-arranged if the input or output
ratios of a filter changes, and scheduling optimizations further
inhibit the readability of the code.

In an object-oriented language, one could implement a stream
abstraction as a library.  This avoids some of the problems associated
with a procedural loop nest, but the programming model is complicated
by efficiency concerns--to optimize cache performance, the entire
application processes blocks of data that complicate and obscure the
underlying algorithm.

In contrast to these alternatives, StreamIt places the filter in its
own independent unit, making explicit the parallelism and inter-filter
communication while hiding the grungy details of scheduling and
optimization from the programmer.

\subsection{Connecting Filters}
\label{sec:connecting}

The basic construct for composing filters into a communicating network
is a {\tt Pipeline}, such as the FM Radio in Figure
\ref{fig:radiocode}.  Like a {\tt Filter}, a {\tt Pipeline} has an
{\tt init} function that is called upon its instantiation.  However,
there is no {\tt work} function, and all input and output channels are
implicit; instead, the stream behaves as the sequential composition of
filters that are specified with successive calls to {\tt add} from
within {\tt init}.

There are two other stream constructors besides {\tt Pipeline}: {\tt
SplitJoin} and {\tt FeedbackLoop} (see Figure \ref{fig:tapelabels}).
From now on, we use the word {\it stream} to refer to any instance of
a Filter, Pipeline, SplitJoin, or FeedbackLoop.  

A SplitJoin is used to specify independent parallel streams that
diverge from a common {\it splitter} and merge into a common {\it
joiner}.  There are two kinds of splitters: 1) Duplicate, which
replicates each data item and sends a copy to each parallel stream,
and 2) RoundRobin($w_1, \dots, w_n$), which sends the first $w_1$
items to the first stream, the next $w_2$ items to the second stream,
and so on.  RoundRobin is also the only type of joiner that we
support; its function is analogous to a round robin splitter.  If a
RoundRobin is written without any weights, we assume that all $w_i =
1$.

The splitter and joiner type are specified with calls to {\tt
setSplitter} and {\tt setJoiner}, respectively (see Figure
\ref{fig:radiocode}); the parallel streams are specified by successive calls
to {\tt add}, with the $i$'th call setting the $i$'th stream in the
SplitJoin.  Note that a RoundRobin can function as an exclusive
selector if one or more of the weights are zero.

The last control construct provides a way to create cycles in the
stream graph: the {\tt FeedbackLoop}.  It contains a joiner, a body
stream, a splitter, and a loop stream, which are set with calls to
{\tt setJoiner}, {\tt setBody}, {\tt setSplitter}, and {\tt setLoop},
respectively.

The feedback loop has a special semantics when the stream is first
starting to run.  Since there are no items on the feedback path at
first, the stream instead inputs items from an {\tt initPath} function
defined by the {\tt FeedbackLoop}; given an index $i$, {\tt initPath}
provides the $i$'th initial input for the feedback joiner.  With a
call to {\tt setDelay} from within the {\tt init} function, the user
can specify how many items should be calculated with {\tt initPath}
before the joiner looks for data items from the feedback channel.

Evident in all of these examples is another feature of the StreamIt
syntax: {\it inlining}.  The definition of any stream or filter can be
inlined at the point of its instantiation, thereby preventing the
definition of many small classes that are used only once, and,
moreover, providing a syntax that reveals the hierarchical structure
of the streams from the indentation level of the code.  In our Java
syntax, we make use of anonymous classes for inlining \cite{java}.

\subsubsection{Rationale}

StreamIt differs from other languages in that it imposes a
well-defined structure on the streams; all stream graphs are built out
of a hierarchical composition of Pipelines, SplitJoins, and
FeedbackLoops.  This is in contrast to other environments, which
generally regard a stream as a flat and arbitrary network of filters
that are connected by channels.  However, arbitrary graphs are very
hard for the compiler to analyze, and equally difficult for a
programmer to describe.  Most programmers either resort to
straight-line code that links one filter to another (thereby making it
very hard to visualize the stream graph), or using an ad-hoc graphical
programming environment that is awkward to use and admits no good
textual representation.

In contrast, StreamIt is a clean textual representation
that--especially with inlined streams--makes it very easy to see the
shape of the computation from the indentation level of the code.  The
comparison of StreamIt's structure with arbitrary stream graphs could
be likened to the difference between structured control flow and GOTO
statements.  Though sometimes the structure restricts the
expressiveness of the programmer, the gains in robustness,
readability, and compiler analysis are immense.

A final benefit of stream graph construction in StreamIt is the
ability to parameterize graphs.  For instance, the Equalizer in Figure
\ref{fig:radiocode} inputs a parameter {\tt N} that controls the
number of parallel streams that it contains.  This further improves
readability and decreases code size.

\subsection{Messages}

StreamIt provides a dynamic messaging system for passing irregular,
low-volume control information between filters and streams.  Messages
are sent from within the body of a filter's {\tt work} function,
perhaps to change a parameter in another filter.  The central aspect
of the messaging system is a sophisticated timing mechanism that
allows filters to specify when a message will be received relative to
the flow of information between the sender and the receiver.  Due to
space constraints, we do not describe the syntax for message
statements, but we do consider the semantics of message timing in
Section \ref{sec:messagesemantics}.

