\section{Language Overview}
\label{sec:overview}

\begin{figure}
\scriptsize
\begin{verbatim}
class FIR extends Filter {
   Channel input = new FloatChannel();
   Channel output = new FloatChannel();
   int N;

   void init(int N) {
      this.N = N;
   }

   void work() {
      float sum = 0;
      for (int i=0; i<N; i++) 
         sum += input.peek(i)*FIR_COEFF[i][N];
      input.pop();
      output.push(sum);
   }
}

class Main extends Stream {
   void init() {
      add(new DataSource());
      add(new FIR(N));
      add(new Display());
   }
}
\end{verbatim}
\vspace{-12pt}
\caption{\protect\small An FIR filter in StreaMIT.
\protect\label{fig:firstreamit}}
\vspace{-12pt}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[t]
\scriptsize
\begin{verbatim}
int N = 5;
int BLOCK_SIZE = 100;

void step(float[] input, float[] output, int numIn, int numOut) {
   float sum = 0;
   for (int k=0; k<numIn; k++)
      sum = sum + input[k]*FIR_COEFF[k+numIn][N];
   for (int k=numIn; k<N; k++) 
      sum = sum + input[k]*FIR_COEFF[k-numIn][N];
   output[numOut] = sum;
   input[numIn] = getData();
}

void main() {
   float input[] = new float[N];
   float output[] = new float[BLOCK_SIZE];
   int numIn, numOut;

   for (numIn=0; numIn<N; numIn++)
      input[numIn] = getData();

   while (true) {

      for (out=0; numIn<N; numIn++, numOut++)
         step(input, output, numIn, numOut);

      int wholeSteps = (BLOCK_SIZE-numOut)/N;
      for (int k=0; k<wholeSteps; k++) {
         for (numIn=0; numIn<N; numIn++, numOut++)
            step(input, output, numIn, numOut);

      for (numIn=0; numOut<BLOCK_SIZE; numIn++, numOut++)
         step(input, output, numIn, numOut);

      displayBlock(output);
   }
}
\end{verbatim}
\vspace{-12pt}
\caption{\protect\small An optimized FIR filter in a procedural
   language.  A complicated loop nest is required to avoid mod
   functions and to use memory efficiently, and the structure of the
   loops depends on the data rates (e.g., BLOCK\_SIZE) within the
   stream.  An actual implementation might inline the calls to {\tt step}.
\protect\label{fig:firprocedural}}
\vspace{-12pt}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[t]
\scriptsize
\begin{verbatim}
class FIRFilter {
   int N;
   float[] input;

   FIRFilter(int N) {
      this.N = N;
   }

   float[] getData(float[] output, int offset, int length) {
      if (input==null) {
         input = new float[MAX_LENGTH];
         source.getData(input, 0, N+length);
      } else {
         source.getData(input, N, length);
      }

      for (int i=0; i<length; i++) {
         float sum = 0;
         for (int j=0; j<N; j++) {
            sum = sum + data1[i+j]*FIR_COEFF[j][N];
         }
         output[i+offset] = sum;
      }

      for (int i=0; i<N; i++) {
         input[i] = input[i+length];
      }
   }
}

void main() {

   DataSource datasource = new DataSource();
   FIRFilter filter = new FIRFilter(5);
   Display display = new Display();
   filter.source = datasource;
   display.source = filter;
   display.run();

}
\end{verbatim}
\vspace{-12pt}
\caption{\protect\small An FIR filter in an object oriented language.
A ``pull model'' is used by each filter object to retrieve a chunk of
data from its source, and straight-line code connects one filter to
another.
\protect\label{fig:firobject}}
\vspace{-12pt}
\end{figure}

StreaMIT includes stream-specific abstractions and representations
that are designed to improve programmer productivity for the domain of
programs described above.  In this paper, we present StreaMIT in legal
Java syntax for ease of presentation.  Though this syntax can express
the fundamental ideas of StreaMIT, in the longer term we plan to
develop a cleaner and more abstract syntax that is designed
specifically for stream programs.

Figure \ref{fig:radiocode} contains a detailed example of a software
radio implemented in StreaMIT; a block diagram of the system appears
in Figure \ref{fig:radiodiagram}.  In the following sections, we draw
on different components of this example to describe and justify the
major features of StreaMIT.  A more detailed guide to the syntax of
StreaMIT can be found in the Appendix.

\subsection{Filters}

\subsubsection{StreaMIT Approach}

The basic unit of computation in StreaMIT is the {\tt Filter}.  An
example of a Filter is the {\tt FIRFilter}, a component of our
software radio (see Figure \ref{fig:firstreamit}).  Each {\tt Filter}
contains an {\tt init} function that is called at initialization time;
in this case, the {\tt FIRFilter} records {\tt N}, the number of items
it should filter at once.  A user should instantiate a filter by using
its constructor, and the {\tt init} function will be called implicitly
with the same arguments that were passed to the
constructor{\footnote{This design might seem unnatural, but it is
necessary to allow inlining (Section \ref{sec:connecting}) and
re-initialization (Section \ref{sec:reinit}) within a Java-based
syntax.}}.

The {\tt work} function describes the most fine grained execution step
of the filter in the steady state.  Within the {\tt work} function,
the filter can communicate with neighboring blocks using the {\tt
input} and {\tt output} channels, which are typed FIFO queues declared
as fields at the top of the class.  These high-volume channels support
the three intuitive operations: 
\begin{enumerate}
\item {\tt pop()} removes an item from
the end of the channel and returns its value.
\item {\tt peek(i)} returns the value of the item $i$ spaces from the end of the channel without
removing it.
\item {\tt push(x)} writes $x$ to the front of
the channel.  The argument $x$ is passed by value; if it is an object,
a separate copy is enqueued on the channel.
\end{enumerate}
A filter can also push, pop, and peek items from within
the {\tt init} function if it needs to set up some initial state on
its channels, although this usually is not necessary.

A major restriction of the current version of StreaMIT is that it
requires filters to have static input and output rates.  That is, the
number of items peeked, popped, and pushed by each filter must be
constant from one invocation of the {\tt work} function to the next.
We plan to support dynamically changing rates in a future version of
StreaMIT.

\subsubsection{Rationale}

StreaMIT's representation of a filter is an improvement over
general-purpose languages.  In a procedural language, the analog of a
filter is a block of statements in a complicated loop nest (see Figure
\ref{fig:firprocedural}).  This representation is unnatural for expressing
the feedback and parallelism that is inherent in streaming systems.
Also, there is no clear abstraction barrier between one filter and
another, and high-volume stream processing is muddled with global
variables and control flow.  The loop nest must be re-arranged if the
input or output ratios of a filter changes, and scheduling
optimizations further inhibit the readability of the code.  In
contrast, StreaMIT places the filter in its own independent unit,
making explicit the parallelism and inter-filter communication while
hiding the grungy details of scheduling and optimization from the
programmer.

One could also use an object-oriented language to implement a stream
abstraction (see Figure \ref{fig:firobject}).  This avoids some of the
problems associated with a procedural loop nest, but the programming
model is again complicated by efficiency concerns.  That is, a runtime
library usually exectutes filters according to a pull model, where a
filter operates on a block of data that it retrieves from the input
channel.  The block size is often optimized for the cache size of a
given architecture, which hampers portability.  Moreover, operating on
large-grained blocks obscures the fundamental fine-grained algorithm
that is visible in a StreaMIT filter.  Thus, the absence of a runtime
model in favor of automated scheduling and optimization again
distinguishes StreaMIT.

\subsection{Connecting Filters}
\label{sec:connecting}

\subsubsection{StreaMIT Approach}

\begin{figure}[t]
\scriptsize
\begin{verbatim}
class FFT extends Stream {
   void init(int N) {
      add(new SplitJoin() {
         void init() {
            setSplitter(WEIGHTED_ROUND_ROBIN(N/2, N/2));
            for (int i=0; i<2; i++) 
               add(new SplitJoin() {
                  void init() {
                     setSplitter(ROUND_ROBIN);
                     add(IDENTITY());
                     add(IDENTITY());
                     setJoiner(WEIGHTED_ROUND_ROBIN(N/4, N/4);
               }});
            setJoiner(ROUND_ROBIN);
      }});
      for (int i=2; i<N; i*=2)
        add(new Butterfly(i, N));
}}
\end{verbatim}
\vspace{-12pt}
\caption{\protect\small A Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) in StreaMIT.
\protect\label{fig:fft}}
\vspace{-12pt}
\end{figure}

The basic construct for composing filters into a communicating network
is a {\tt Stream}.  The FFT in Figure \ref{fig:fft} is an example of a
{\tt Stream} that appears in our software radio.  Like a {\tt Filter},
a {\tt Stream} has an {\tt init} function that is called upon its
instantiation.  However, there is no {\tt work} function, and all
input and output channels are implicit; instead, the stream behaves as
the sequential composition of filters that are specified with
successive calls to {\tt add} from within {\tt init}.  That is, {\tt
Stream} creates a single pipeline.

There are two other stream constructors besides {\tt Stream}: {\tt
SplitJoin} and {\tt FeedbackLoop}.  The former is used to specify
independent parallel streams that diverge from a common {\it splitter}
and merge into a common {\it joiner}.  There are three kinds of
splitters:
\begin{enumerate}
\item WEIGHTED\_ROUND\_ROBIN($i_1$, $i_2$, $\dots$, $i_k)$,
which sends the first $i_1$ data items to the first stream, the next
$i_2$ data items to the second stream, and so on.
\item ROUND\_ROBIN, which is just a weighted round robin where all
weights are 1.
\item DUPLICATE, which replicates each data item and sends a copy to each
parallel stream.
\item NULL, which means that all of the parallel components are
sources and there is no input to split.
\end{enumerate}
Similarly, there are three kinds of joiners: 
\begin{enumerate}
\item WEIGHTED\_ROUND\_ROBIN($i_1$, $i_2$, $\dots$, $i_k)$, which reads the
first $i_1$ data items from the first stream, the next $i_2$ data
items to the second stream, and so on.
\item ROUND\_ROBIN, which is just a weighted round robin where all
weights are 1.
\item COMBINE, which reads from all the streams in parallel and combines the results into a structure.  The structure has a separate field for each stream, 
and the joiner cannot fire until each field is filled by an item from the 
corresponding output channel.
\item NULL, which means that all of the parallel components are sinks
and there is no output to join together.
\end{enumerate}
The splitter and joiner type are specified with calls to {\tt
setSplitter} and {\tt setJoiner}, respectively (see Figure
\ref{fig:fft}); the parallel streams are specified by successive calls
to {\tt add}, with the $i$'th call setting the $i$'th stream in the
SplitJoin .  Note that a WEIGHTED\_ROUND\_ROBIN can function as an
exclusive selector if one or more of the weights are zero.  Also,
there are additional splitters and joiners that we plan to add when
StreaMIT supports filters with dynamically changing rates, including:
\begin{enumerate}
\item TYPE\_DISPATCH, which sends an item to one of multiple streams
depending on its type.
\item ANY, which sends items to any parallel stream that has space on
its input, or reads items from any parallel stream that has output
available.
\end{enumerate}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\psfig{figure=basic-pipeline.eps,width=3.0in}

(a) A Stream. \\
\vspace{8pt}
\psfig{figure=basic-splitjoin.eps,width=3.0in}

(b) A SplitJoin. \\
\vspace{8pt}
\psfig{figure=basic-feedback.eps,width=3.0in}

(c) A FeedbackLoop. \\
\vspace{8pt}
\caption{Stream structures supported by StreaMIT.}
\label{fig:structuresp}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\scriptsize
\begin{verbatim}
class Fibonnacci extends FeedbackLoop {
   void init() {
      setDelay(2);
      setJoiner(WEIGHTED_ROUND_ROBIN(0,1));
      setBody(new Filter() {
          Channel input = new IntChannel();
          Channel output = new IntChannel();
          void work() {
              output.push(input.peek(0)+input.peek(1));
              input.pop();
          }
      });
      setSplitter(DUPLICATE);
   }

   int initPath(int index) {
      return index;
   }
}
\end{verbatim}
\vspace{-12pt}
\caption{\protect\small A FeedbackLoop version of Fibonnacci.
\protect\label{fig:feed}}
\vspace{-12pt}
\end{figure}

The last control construct provides a way to create cycles in the
stream graph: the {\tt FeedbackLoop}.  It contains a joiner, a body
stream, a splitter, and a loop stream, which are set with calls to
{\tt setJoiner}, {\tt setBody}, {\tt setSplitter}, and {\tt setLoop},
respectively (see Figure \ref{fig:feed}).  The splitters and joiners
can be any of those for SplitJoin, except for NULL.

The feedback loop has a special semantics when the stream is first
starting to run.  Since there are no items on the feedback path at
first, the stream instead inputs items from an {\tt initPath} function
defined by the {\tt FeedbackLoop}; {\tt initPath} is called with the
number of the data item that is being fabricated (starting from 0).
With a call to {\tt setDelay} from within the {\tt init} function, the
user can specify how many items should be calculated with {\tt
initPath} before the joiner looks for data items from the feedback
channel.

Evident in all of these examples is another feature of the StreaMIT
syntax: {\it inlining}.  The definition of any stream or filter can be
inlined at the point of its instantiation, thereby preventing the
definition of many small classes that are used only once, and,
moreover, providing a syntax that reveals the hierarchical structure
of the streams from the indentation level of the code.  In our Java
syntax, we make use of anonymous classes for inlining \cite{java}.

\subsubsection{Rationale}

StreaMIT differs from other languages in that it imposes a
well-defined structure on the streams; all stream graphs are built out
of a hierarchical composition of Streams, SplitJoins, and
FeedbackLoops.  This is in contrast to other environments, which
generally regard a stream as a flat and arbitrary network of filters
that are connected by channels.  However, arbitrary graphs are very
hard for the compiler to analyze, and equally difficult for a
programmer to describe.  Most programmers either resort to
straight-line code that links one filter to another (thereby making it
very hard to visualize the stream graph), or using an ad-hoc graphical
programming environment that is awkward to use and admits no good
textual representation.

In contrast, StreaMIT is a clean textual representation
that--especially with inlined streams--makes it very easy to see the
shape of the computation from the indentation level of the code.  The
comparison of StreaMIT's structure with arbitrary stream graphs could
be likened to the difference between structured control flow and GOTO
statements.  Though sometimes the structure restricts the
expressiveness of the programmer, the gains in robustness,
readability, and compiler analysis are immense.

A final benefit of stream graph construction in StreaMIT is the
ability to do {\it scripting} to parameterize graphs.  For instance,
both the FFT stream in Figure \ref{fig:fft} inputs a parameter {\tt N}
and adjusts the number of butterfly stages appropriately.  This
further improves readability and decreases code size.

\subsection{Messages}

\subsubsection{StreaMIT Approach}

\begin{figure}
\psfig{figure=portal-code.eps,width=3.0in}
\caption{The frequency-hopping of our software radio illustrates StreaMIT's messaging system.  In {\tt TrunkedRadio}, a {\tt Portal} is created to hold the message target, {\tt rf2if}.  Then, {\tt CheckFreqHop} uses the {\tt Portal} to send a frequency-change message.}
\vspace{-12pt}
\label{fig:portal-code}
\end{figure}

StreaMIT provides a dynamic messaging system for passing irregular,
low-volume control information between filters and streams.  Messages
are sent from within the body of a filter's {\tt work} function,
perhaps to change a parameter in another filter.  For example, in the
{\tt CheckFreqHop} stream of our software radio example (Figure
\ref{fig:portal-code}), a message is sent upstream to change the frequency of
the receiver if the downstream component detects that the transmitter
is about to change frequencies.  The sender can continue to execute
while the message is en route, and the {\tt set\_freq} method will be
invoked in the receiver with argument {\tt Freq[k]} when the message
arrives.  Since message delivery is asynchronous, there can be no
return value; only void methods can be message targets.

{\bf Message timing.}The central aspect of the messaging system is a
sophisticated timing mechanism that allows filters to specify when a
message will be received relative to the flow of information between
the sender and the receiver.  Recall that each filter executes
independently, without any notion of global time.  Thus, the only way
for two filters to talk about a time that is meaningful for both of
them is in terms of the data items that are passed through the streams
from one to the other.

In StreaMIT, one can specify a range of latencies for a message to get
delivered.  This latency is measured in terms of an information
``wavefront'' from one filter to another.  For example, in the {\tt
CheckFreqHop} example of Figure \ref{fig:portal-code}, the sender
indicates an interval of latencies between $4N$ and $6N$.  This means
that the receiver will receive the message immediately following the
last invocation of its own {\tt work} function which produces an item
affecting the some output of the {\it sender's} $4N$'th to $6N$'th
work functions, counting the sender's current work function as number
0.  Defining this notion precisely is the subject of Section
\ref{sec:time}, but the general idea is simple:  the receiver is
invoked when it sees the information wavefront that the sender sees in
$4N$ to $6N$ execution steps.  

In some cases, the ability to synchronize the arrival of a message
with some element of the data stream is very important.  For example,
{\tt CheckFreqHop} knows that the transmitter will change the
frequency between $4N$ and $6N$ steps later, in terms of the frame
that {\tt CheckFreqHop} is inputting.  To ensure that the radio
changes frequencies at the same time--so as not to lose any data at
the old or new frequency--{\tt CheckFreqHop} instructs the receiver to
switch frequencies when the {\it receiver} sees one of the last data
items at the old frequency.

If the receiver of a message is a stream instead of a filter, then the
message delivery is timed with respect to the first (most upstream)
filter in the stream.  We are still formalizing the message delivery
semantics in cases where the receiver is a stream that has no unique
first filter (e.g., a SplitJoin with NULL splitter).  Note that the
stream itself can receive a message even though the timing is in terms
of filter-to-filter communication.

{\bf Portals for broadcast messaging.}  StreaMIT also has support for
modular broadcast messaging.  When a sender wants to send a message
that will invoke method $M$ of the receiver $R$ upon arrival, it does
not call $M$ on the object $R$.  Rather, it calls $M$ on a {\it
Portal} of which $R$ is a member.  Portals are typed containers that
forward all messages they receive to the elements of the container.
Portals could be useful in cases when a component of a filter library
needs to announce a message (e.g., that it is shutting down) but does
not know the list of recipients; the user of the library can pass the
filter a Portal containing all interested receivers.  As for message
delivery constraints, the user specifies a single time interval for
each message, and that interval is interpreted separately (as
described above) for each receiver in the Portal.

In a language with generic data types, a Portal could be implemented
as a templated list.  However, since Java does not yet support
templates, we automatically generate an {\tt <X>Portal} class for
every class and interface {\tt <X>}.  Our syntax for using Portals is
evident in the {\tt TrunkedRadio} class in Figure
\ref{fig:portal-code}.

\subsubsection{Rationale}

Stream programs present a challenge in that filters need both regular,
high-volume data transfer and irregular, low-volume control
communication.  Moreover, there is the problem of reasoning about the
relative ``time'' between filters when they are running asynchronously
and in parallel.

A different approach to messaging is to embed control messages in the
data stream instead of providing a separate mechanism for dynamic
message passing.  This does have the effect of associating the message
time with a data item, but it is complicated, error-prone, and leads
to unreadable code.  Further, it could hurt performance in the steady
state (if each filter has to check whether or not a data item is
actual data or control, instead) and complicates compiler analysis,
too.  Finally, one can't send messages upstream without creating a
separate data channel for them to travel in.

Another solution is to treat messages as synchronous method calls.
However, this delays the progress of the stream when the message is en
route, thereby degrading the performance of the program and
restricting the compiler's freedom to reorder filter executions.  

We feel that the StreaMIT messaging model is an advance in that it
separates the notions of low-volume and high-volume data
transfer--both for the programmer and the compiler--without losing a
well-defind semantics where messages are {\it timed} relative to the
high-volume data flow.  Further, by separating message communication
into its own category, fewer connections are needed for steady-state
data transfer and the resulting stream graphs are more amenable to
structured stream programming.

\subsection{Re-Initialization}
\label{sec:reinit}

\subsubsection{StreaMIT Approach}

One of the characteristics of a streaming application is the need to
occaisionally modify the structure of part of the stream graph.
StreaMIT allows these changes through a re-initialization mechanism
that is integrated with its messaging model.  If a sender targets a
message at the {\tt init} function of a stream or filter $S$, then
when the message arrives, it re-executes the initialazation code and
replaces $S$ with a new version of itself.  However, the new version
might have a different structure than the original if the arguments to
the {\tt init} call on re-initialization were different than during
the original initialization.

When an init message arrives, it does not kill all of the data that is
in the stream being re-initialized.  Rather, it {\it drains} the
stream until the wavefront of information (as defined for the
messaging model) from the top of the stream has reached the bottom.
The draining occurs without consuming any data from the input channels
to the re-initialized region.  Instead, a {\tt drain} function of each
filter is invoked to provide input when its other input source is
frozen.  (Each filter can override the {\tt drain} function as part of
its definition.)  If the programmer prefers to kill the data in a
stream segment instead of draining it, this can be indicated by
sending an extra argument to the message portal with the
re-initialization message.

\subsubsection{Rationale}

Re-initialization is a headache for stream programmers because--if
done manually--the entire runtime system could be put on hold to
re-initialize a portion of the stream.  The interface to starting and
stopping streams could be complicated when there is not an explicit
notion of initialization time vs. steady-state execution time, and
ad-hoc draining techniques could risk losing data or deadlocking the
system.

StreaMIT improves on this situation by abstracting the
re-initialization process from the user.  That is, no auxillary
control program is needed to drain the old streams and create the new
structure; the user need only trigger the reinitialization process
through a message.  Additionally, any hierarchical stream construct
automatically becomes a possible candidate for re-initialization, due
to the well-defined stream structure and the simple interface with the
{\tt init} function.  Finally, it is easy for the compiler to
recognize stream re-initialization possibilities and to account for
all possible configurations of the stream flow graph during analysis
and optimization.

\subsection{Latency Constraints}

Lastly, StreaMIT provides a simple way of restricting the latency of
an information wavefront in traveling from the input of one filter to
the output of a downstream filter.  Issueing the directive {\tt
MAX\_LATENCY(A, B, n)} from within an {\tt init} means that $A$ can
only execute up to the wavefront of information that $B$ will see
after $n$ invocations of its own work function.

In the case that $A$ is a stream instead of a filter, then the latency
is with regards to the most upstream filter of $A$; likewise, if $B$
is a stream, then the latency is with regards to the most downstream
filter in $B$.  We are still in the process of formalizing the
semantics in cases when there is no unique upstream or downstream
filter in these streams.


