This directory contains two sample reports from the SLS group,
contained in sls-toledano-eltiempo.tex and sls-ilh-rules.tex.  Both
files contain comments intended to illustrate how to use the LaTeX
class for the LCS Annual Report.

There is also the file sls.tex, which is the master include file for
the SLS group.  Each group (e.g., SLS, CAG, etc.) should have its own
master include file that lists all the reports associated with it.
Finally, add \input{<group name>} (e.g., \input{sls}) to the main.tex
file to test out your group's reports.

A simple makefile is included which runs latex, bibtex, latex, and
latex again to produce a DVI file.  You can then use dvips or similar
to produce a PostScript file if you wish.

Please be careful with naming conventions.  We would like report names
to be of the form <group name>-<report name>.tex, any included
PostScript figures to be of the form <group name>-<report name>.eps,
and BibTeX files to be of the form <group name>-<report name>.bib.
Within your reports, please make \label{}s unique and of the form
<group name>-<report name>-<label name> (e.g., sls-ilh-rules-table),
again to avoid name collisions with other reports.  Finally, if you
define macros in your reports, take care to choose names to minimize
the chance of name collisions.

If you absolutely need to have a \usepackage{} for your report, you
will have to add the \usepackage to the preamble of the main.tex
file.  When you submit your reports to Vicky Palay, please make a note
of this and include the .sty file in your submission.

Lee Hetherington <ilh@sls.lcs.mit.edu>
5 February 2002
