\section{Related Work}
\label{sec:related}

Several groups are researching strategies for efficient code
generation for DSP applications.  SPIRAL is a system that generates
libraries for signal processing
algorithms\cite{spiral,johnson01searching,egner01automatic}.  Using a
feedback-directed search process, DSP transforms are optimized for the
underlying architecture.  The input language to SPIRAL is
SPL\cite{xiong01spl,xiong-thesis}, which provides a parameterizable
way of expressing matrix computations.  Given a matrix representation
in SPL, SPIRAL generates formulas that correspond to different
factorizations of the matrix.  It searches for the most efficient
formula using several techniques, including dynamic programming and
stochastic evolutionary search.

We consider our work to be complementary to SPIRAL.  While SPIRAL
starts with a matrix representation in SPL, we start with general
StreamIt code and use linear dataflow analysis to extract a matrix
representation where possible.  Our linear combination rules are
distinct from the factorizations of SPIRAL, as StreamIt nodes can peek
at items that they do not consume.  In the future, SPIRAL could be
integrated with StreamIt to optimize a matrix factorization for a
given architecture.

The ATLAS project \cite{whaley01automated} also aims to produce fast
libraries for linear algebra manipulations, focusing on adaptive
library generation for varying architectures.  FFTW~\cite{frigo99fast}
is a runtime library of highly optimized FFT's that dynamically adapt
to architectural variations.  Again, StreamIt is distinguished by its
extraction and optimization of linear filters from general user-level
code.

ADE (A Design Environment) is a system for specifying, analyzing, and
manipulating DSP algorithms~\cite{covell-ade}.  ADE includes a
rule-based system that can search for improved arrangements of stream
algorithms using extensible transformation rules.  However, the system
uses predefined signal processing blocks that are specified in
mathematical terms, rather than the user-specified imperative code
that appears in a StreamIt filter.  Moreover, ADE is intended for
algorithm exploration, while StreamIt includes support for code
generation and whole-program development.  In addition to ADE, other
work on DSP algorithm development is surveyed
in~\cite{oppenheim-symbolic}.

A number of other programming languages are oriented around a notion
of a stream (see \cite{survey97} for a survey.)  Synchronous languages
such as LUSTRE~\cite{lustre}, Esterel~\cite{esterel92}, and
Signal~\cite{signal} target the embedded domain, while languages such
as Occam~\cite{occammanual}, SISAL~\cite{sisal} and StreamC~\cite{Rix98}
target parallel and vector targets.  However, none of the compilers
for these languages have coarse-grained, DSP-specific analyses such as
linear filter detection.

Note that the ``linear data flow analysis'' of Ryan~\cite{ryan92} is
completely unrelated to our work; it aims to do program analysis in
linear time.

% Something should be said about other stream projects and their attempts at optimizations...
% which I know very little about.
