\section{Conclusion}
\label{sec:conclusion}

In this paper, we describe the StreamIt compiler and a backend for the
Raw architecture.  Unlike other streaming languages, StreamIt enforces
a structure on the stream graph that allows a systematic approach to
optimization and parallelization.  The structure enables us to define
multiple transformations and to compose them in a hierarchical manner.

We introduce a collection of optimizations--vertical and horizontal
filter fusion, vertical and horizontal filter fission, and filter
reordering--that can be used to restructure stream graphs.  We show
that by applying these transformations, the compiler can automatically
convert a high-level stream program, written to reflect the
composition of the application, into a load-balanced executable for
Raw.

The stream graph of a StreamIt program exposes the data communication
pattern to the compiler, and the lack of global synchronization frees
the compiler to reorganize the program for efficient execution on the
underlying architecture. The StreamIt compiler demonstrates the power
of this flexibility by partitioning large programs for execution on
Raw.  However, many of the techniques we describe are not limited to
Raw; in fact, we believe that the explicit parallelism and
communication in StreamIt is essential for obtaining high performance
on other communication-exposed architectures.  In this sense, we
consider the techniques described in this paper to be a first step
towards establishing a portable programming model for
communication-exposed machines.
