\section{Conclusion and Future Work}
\label{chpt:conclusion}

This paper presents two techniques used for scheduling Synchronous
Data Flow Graphs as used by the {\StreamIt} language. Unlike other
langauges, {\StreamIt} enforces a structure on the stream graph,
thus allowing a variety of new approaches to stream scheduling.
Algorithms presented here improve current scheduling techniques in
multiple ways.

A hierarchical approach to scheduling of streaming applications
allows for very simple algorithms. Program graphs do not have to
be considered globally, thus less data needs to be kept track of.
In the hierarchical approaches presented here, we only need to
consider immediate children of a given operator.

The phased approach to scheduling allows the scheduling of
arbitrarily tight {\feedbackloops} and allows for more
fine-grained control of buffering requirements. The fine-grained
control of buffering requirements can provide dramatic reduction
of buffer sizes when scheduling streaming applications, as has
been presented here. Furthermore, phased schedules lend themselves
to some easy forms of compression, thus further reducing the
schedule size. Future work will concentrate on expanding phased
scheduling to implement schedules that have some real-life
constraints put upon them. For example, a program may need to keep
all its data in processor caches to provide high performance.
Adapting buffer sharing to phased scheduling will also be
explored, as it promises further reduction in buffer requirements.
