Many parallel programs can be naturally represented as a graph of
independent components (or {\it actors}) that communicate over
channels.  In this paper, we present a stream dependence
function, $\sdep$, which describes the ordering constraints between
executions of parallel actors.  This dependence information offers
many of the benefits of slicing in procedural langauges, including
debugging and program analysis.  However, unlike slicing, we focus on
the domain of Synchronous Dataflow (SDF) programs, in which each
component has a fixed input and output rate.  We leverage the static
properties of SDF to compute $\sdep$ exactly at compile time and to
store the dependence information compactly.

Using $\sdep$, we develop a new language construct to address one of
the pitfalls of parallel programming: precise timing of events across
parallel components.  The construct, termed {\it teleport messaging},
uses the dependence information to provide a common notion of time in
a parallel system.  For example, an actor $A$ can specify that an
event should be received in an actor $B$ as soon as $B$ sees the
``effects'' of the current output of $A$.  Based on a case study of a
software radio, we argue that the language feature significantly
improves programmer productivity. We have also implemented
fully-automatic support for this feature in the StreamIt compiler,
with a backend for a cluster of workstations.  We demonstrate that for
our case study, incorporating precise event handling into the language
improves performance by an average of 49\%.
