\section{Introduction}

Applications that are structured around streams of data are becoming
increasingly pervasive.  Stream programs include embedded systems for
sensor nets and cell phones, desktop applications such as streaming
media and networking, as well as high-performance servers such as HDTV
editing consoles and hyper-spectral imaging.  Performance is still a
critical factor in all of these domains, and programmers often
sacrifice readability, robustness, and maintainability of their code
in order to achieve it.  It is an important problem to improve the
programmability of stream programs without sacrificing performance.

This paper makes two contributions towards this goal.  First, we
formulate a stream dependence function, $\sdep$, which describes the
ordering constraints of node executions in a concurrent stream graph.
This dependence information is similar to a program
slice~\cite{tip95slice,hrb88pdg} in procedural programs and carries
with it many of the applications of slicing, including debugging and
program analysis.  However, unlike slicing, we restrict our input
domain to a Synchronous Dataflow (SDF) ~\cite{LM87-i} graph, which is
a natural representation for many signal processing applications.  We
leverage the static properties of SDF to compute $\sdep$ exactly at
compile time and to store the dependence information compactly.

The second contribution of this paper is a novel language construct
that uses $\sdep$ to provide simple and precise event handling in
stream programs.  In addition to the high-bandwidth data flow of
streaming applications, there are also low-bandwidth control messages
that adjust parameters in the stream graph; for example, toggling the
gain to suite the signal-to-noise ratio, or steering a microphone
array to follow a moving target.  Control messages are dynamic and
irregular, which makes them hard to integrate with a Synchronous
Dataflow model.  Most of all, they often have a constraint on the
timing of their delivery, which further complicates the programming
model because concurrent actors have no common frame of reference with
respect to time.

We define a messaging construct that utilizes data dependences 


Since stream programs have abundant parallelism, it is
often 

 this restriction, we can compute $\sdep$ exactly for any
filter in the program, and we

can be seen as a form of slicing for the streaming domain


set of filter in a concurrent stream graph that affect the output of a
given filter.

stream dependence function, $\sdep$, that describes the

we believe there are many applications of the sdep function.  in here
we focus on precise event handling.  concurrently executing programs
have no notion of time, but they often want to send things
precisely. in a synchronous dataflow model, current solutions to this
are grungy and do not mesh well with the static part.  we implement
language support for control messages and argue that it improves
programmability.  we also demonstrate a XXX performance improvement on
a cluster backend.

<informal outline of paper>
we use streamit (cite streamit) which is sdf language, single in
single out.  in the next section, describe our 

\cite{streamitcc}
